Observability:
We use this know about the internal State of a System. Here the system can be a application or a device or a network.
It divides into three parameters. They are:
1. Metrics
2. Logging
3. Traces

1. Metrics: What are the things that got passed or failed or high and low.
Means these are numerical values of a systems internal parts which are like 
Memory Utilization, CPU Utilization, Disk Space, For an application how HTTP requests were passed and failed.

2. Logging: It says about why the situation occurs.
It gives information about why the CPU got utilized and why it got triggered at a given time.
It gives why our system in this state and also provides information about it where we can try to fix it with the info.
Where the memory is being utilized more.

3. Traces: Lifecycle of a request, where it goes and where it ends.

Difference between Observability and Monitoring?
Here Monitoring is a part of Observability
Monitoring only deals with Metrics only like if the system got out of space suddenly or memory utilization gets increased
suddenly then we will fix some ALERTS and create some DASHBOARDS using grafana for them.

MONITORING:
Combination Metrics Alerts and Dashboards of this metrics that genertes the values periodically is called Monitoring.
Metrics:
It is the historical data or periodical data of the events occurs in a system.

Prometheus:
It is an open source monitoring and alerting tool for applications and systems.
It has three main components:
Retrieval:
It will retrieve the data and info about the systems metrics from the Exporters.
Time Series DataBase(TSDB):
The data i.e. retrieved from above step will be stored in this TSDB on time basis.
HTTP Server:
This is used as response provider like using PROMQL a user can able to get the data from TSDB using HTTP server.
When the user sends a request in  PROMQL then HTTP server will gives us the response of metrics.

Exporters:
There different type of exporters like these are used to extract the information of metrics from systems or apps or K8's clusters
using Service Discovery Mechanism.

Exporters are small applications that collect metrics from various third-party systems and expose them 
in a format Prometheus can scrape. 

Node Exporter:
It will collect the metrics from the nodes or instances of a K8 cluster.

Service Discovery:
It is mechanism to extract the metrics from various systems using endpoints.
Service discovery automatically identifies and manages the list of scrape targets (i.e., services or applications) that 
Prometheus monitors.

Kube State metrics using api calls to and it calls API Server in master node regarding pods and scrapes the metrics for Prometheus.

OIDC Provider:
When a service like Prometheus installed in a EKS Cluster wants to contact with any aws services of that account then we need an 
OIDC Provider.

Node Groups: 
A node group is a logical grouping of worker nodes with the same configuration and lifecycle managemen

Prometheus will provide all the metrics and access to all those to anyone who has access to the Prometheus and also alerting.
Grafana we use it better visualization for each metrics and we can customize them in a way that we can only visible few metrics 
according to the role of that user.

Observability Day-3: Using box-crash as example pod we will visualize the crashes
First we will create eks cluster in AWS using cli commands --> create IAM OIDC Provider for that cluster--> Create a node group to 
give compute capacity fro cluster by installing ec2 Instances through nodegroup(worker nodes) --> Installing prometheus repo on vm
--> Then create a new namespace using kubectl --> git clone the repo that we use --> Using helm chart support install alert manager
--> It will install Prometheus pods, kube-state metrics, node-exporter, grafana pods up and running in the cluster of namespace
monitoring --> Using port-forward we will run the Prometheus, Grafana, Alert Manager and all--> Now, try a randome box-crash container
and run it using that we can visulize the metrics from prometheus regarding restarts of pod.

Open the ports for Prometheus(9093) and Grafana(8080) in SG of instance we create the cluster.

Difference between Logging and Traces:
Let’s say you have a microservices-based e-commerce app.

🔸 Trace Example (via Tempo)
A user places an order. The trace shows:
frontend → order-service → payment-service → inventory-service

Each step has a span with duration and status.
You can see where the request slowed down (e.g., payment-service took 3s).
🔸 Log Example (via Loki)
The payment-service logs:

2025-04-29 10:15:23 ERROR Payment failed for order #1234: Card declined
This log helps you understand why the payment failed.

ELK: ElasticSearch, Logstash, Kibana
In this ELK Stack first comes, 

ElasticSearch: Port- 9200
Here, basically the data will comes from the Logstash, the entire log data will get stored in the ElasticSearch and these 
data will get indexed here. So that if anything we want can be easily accessible for any query.

Logstash:Port-5044
It is used to process the raw data log file from an Application or a request or anything.
Using Logstash, we can able parse and filter the log file data in the etc/logstash/conf.d/logstash.conf file, where in this 
file we can find a "grok" component where we can configure in such a way that we need to parse the data.
Ex:
filter {
 grok {
 match => { "message" => "%{TIMESTAMP_ISO8601:log_timestamp} %{LOGLEVEL:log_level}
%{GREEDYDATA:log_message}" }
 }
}

After this parsing, the data will be sent to ElasticSearch, where the data will get indexed there. So that we can able to 
query the required data that we want from ElasticSearch.
Also, in output component we will give the elasticsearch info, So that the data will get stored there.
Ex:
output {
 elasticsearch {
 hosts => ["http://localhost:9200"]
 index => "logs-%{+YYYY.MM.dd}"
 }
 stdout { codec => rubydebug }
}

Kibana uses port 5601 by default for its web application interface.

Metrics displayed by Grafana:
System Performance Metrics: 
CPU Usage: Percentage of CPU utilization, broken down by core or overall.
Memory Usage: Amount of RAM used and available, often with swap usage.
Disk I/O: Read and write speeds, disk space usage, and latency.
Network Traffic: Bandwidth usage, packet loss, and connection latency.
System Load: Average number of processes in the run queue.
Uptime: Time since the system was last restarted.

Application Performance Metrics: 
Request Latency: Time taken to process a single request (e.g., in milliseconds).
Error Rates: Number or percentage of failed requests.
Throughput: Number of requests processed per second or minute.
Response Codes: HTTP status codes (e.g., 200, 404, 500) and their counts.
Queue Lengths: Number of tasks waiting to be processed.
Cache Hit/Miss Ratio: For applications using caching.

















